chore(memory): promote strong-fit forms-and-reports drafts from memory-pipeline for review (#122)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/forms-and-reports/issues/10784-fix8974-correctly-populate-end-field-in-forms.md

---
id: cht-core-8974
category: bug
domain: forms-and-reports
domainFit: strong
issueNumber: 8974
issueUrl: https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8974
title: Fix `end` meta field always matching `start` by dispatching enketo-core's native `before-save` DOM event on form save

> lastUpdated: '2026-08-19'

Reviewer: **nitpick (non-blocking):** Same as above. The edit is dated 2026-08-25.

```suggestion
lastUpdated: '2026-08-25'
```

techStack:
  - typescript
  - angular
  - enketo-core
  - jquery
  - dom-events
tags:
  - enketo
  - forms
  - meta-fields
  - before-save
  - dom-events
  - jquery-migration
  - timestamps
  - form-save
related_workflows:
  - form-submission
source_pr: medic/cht-core#10784
source_sha: dcde1193c2bc00565d716adb304bf9b27001173e
distilled_at: '2026-06-22'
reviewed_by: null
reviewed_at: null
confidence: medium
entities:
  - webapp/src/ts/services/enketo.service.ts
  - webapp/src/ts/modules/contacts/contacts-edit.component.ts
  - webapp/src/types/enketo-core.d.ts
concepts:
  - form meta fields (start/end timestamps)
  - native DOM event dispatch vs jQuery .trigger()
  - library-supplied event factories over hand-built CustomEvents
  - enketo-core integration
  - declare module shims for untyped deep imports
  - prepareForSave lifecycle hook
related_issues: []
stale: false
---

## Problem

The `end` meta field in CHT forms always recorded (almost) the exact same value as `start`, regardless of how long the user took to fill out the form. This affected both app forms and contact forms, corrupting any form-duration/completion-time analytics derived from these timestamps.

## Root Cause

> In `prepareForSave`, CHT fired `$('form.or').trigger('beforesave')`, which had two defects: (1) the event name `beforesave` was missing the hyphen. enketo-core's event.js defines the event as `before-save`: in 7.2.5, the version webapp/package.json pins, `BeforeSave()` returns `new CustomEvent('before-save', { bubbles: true })`. And (2) jQuery's `.trigger()` only invokes jQuery-bound listeners and never reaches native `addEventListener` listeners. enketo-core's preload.js updates the `end` value inside a native `before-save` DOM listener (`form.model.evaluate('now()', 'string')`). Since enketo-core 7.x (the Enketo Uplift in CHT 4.0.0) dropped jQuery entirely, that native callback silently never executed, leaving `end` frozen at its preloaded value equal to `start`.

Reviewer: **nitpick (non-blocking):** "the version webapp/package.json pins" is a caret range, `"^7.2.5"`, which
is a floor. What pins 7.2.5 in practice is `webapp/patches/enketo-core+7.2.5.patch` (and the lockfile
resolution). The event fact itself is exact; I read `BeforeSave()` in the installed 7.2.5.

```suggestion
In `prepareForSave`, CHT fired `$('form.or').trigger('beforesave')`, which had two defects: (1) the event name `beforesave` was missing the hyphen. enketo-core's event.js defines the event as `before-save`: in 7.2.5 (webapp/package.json requests `^7.2.5`; webapp/patches/enketo-core+7.2.5.patch pins it in practice), `BeforeSave()` returns `new CustomEvent('before-save', { bubbles: true })`. And (2) jQuery's `.trigger()` only invokes jQuery-bound listeners and never reaches native `addEventListener` listeners. enketo-core's preload.js updates the `end` value inside a native `before-save` DOM listener (`form.model.evaluate('now()', 'string')`). Since enketo-core 7.x (the Enketo Uplift in CHT 4.0.0) dropped jQuery entirely, that native callback silently never executed, leaving `end` frozen at its preloaded value equal to `start`.
```

> In `prepareForSave`, CHT fired `$('form.or').trigger('beforesave')`, which had two defects: (1) the event name `beforesave` was missing the hyphen. enketo-core's event.js defines the event as `before-save`: in 7.2.5 (webapp/package.json requests `^7.2.5`; webapp/patches/enketo-core+7.2.5.patch pins it in practice), `BeforeSave()` returns `new CustomEvent('before-save', { bubbles: true })`. And (2) jQuery's `.trigger()` only invokes jQuery-bound listeners and never reaches native `addEventListener` listeners. enketo-core's preload.js updates the `end` value inside a native `before-save` DOM listener (`form.model.evaluate('now()', 'string')`). Since enketo-core 7.x (the Enketo Uplift in CHT 4.0.0) dropped jQuery entirely, that native callback silently never executed, leaving `end` frozen at its preloaded value equal to `start`.

Reviewer: **nitpick (non-blocking):** The patch file does not pin the version. A patch-package file only
records the version it was made for. `webapp/package-lock.json` pins `enketo-core` to `7.2.5` on
master.

```suggestion
In `prepareForSave`, CHT fired `$('form.or').trigger('beforesave')`, which had two defects: (1) the event name `beforesave` was missing the hyphen. enketo-core's event.js defines the event as `before-save`: in 7.2.5 (webapp/package.json requests `^7.2.5`, webapp/package-lock.json resolves it to 7.2.5, and webapp/patches/enketo-core+7.2.5.patch is written against that version), `BeforeSave()` returns `new CustomEvent('before-save', { bubbles: true })`. And (2) jQuery's `.trigger()` only invokes jQuery-bound listeners and never reaches native `addEventListener` listeners. enketo-core's preload.js updates the `end` value inside a native `before-save` DOM listener (`form.model.evaluate('now()', 'string')`). Since enketo-core 7.x (the Enketo Uplift in CHT 4.0.0) dropped jQuery entirely, that native callback silently never executed, leaving `end` frozen at its preloaded value equal to `start`.
```
